# Internationalization

Zoia is a multilanguage system out of the box. [Lingui](https://lingui.js.org/) is used as a main library for internationalization.

All messages are compiled to the centralized catalogs which are separated into two parts: admin messages and user templates. Both of them are located in the following directories:

* *shared/locales/admin*
* *shared/locales/user*

## Adding a new locale

To add a new locale, you may need to run the following script:

`npm run add-locale-admin` (where *xx* is your locale)

`npm run add-locale-user` (where *xx* is your locale)

The corresponding directories will be created under the *shared/locales/admin* and *shared/locales/user*.

Then you will need to extract the existing messages into your *messages.po* files. To do so, run the following script:

`npm run extract`

After that, the messages which you will need to translate will be put into *messages.po* file. Translate the required messages and compile them using

`npm run compile`

You will need to re-compile your messages and Zoia each time you make any changes to the message catalogs.

When finished, recompile your Zoia instance to include the latest changes to your message catalogs:

`npm run build`

## Administration Area

The Admin panel is built using React so the Lungui.js is natively supported there. You may use all Lingui features to access your messages, and the messages are extracted from your code automatically.

Example:

```javascript
import { I18n } from '@lingui/react';
import { Trans, t } from '@lingui/macro';

...

render = () => (
    <I18n>
        {({ i18n }) => {
            return (<>
                <Trans>New Page</Trans>
                {i18n._(t`Hello world`)}
            </>);
        }}
    </I18n>
);
```

See more examples in default modules like *pages* or *users*.

## User Space

Because Marko is not fully supported by Lingui, only a limited functionality is available. So there are several hacks required, but only in case if you are developing your own module. To translate any of the existing modules to your locale you won't need the actions listed below.

You will need to create a Translations.jsx file in your *modules/module/user* directory (where *module* is an ID of your module) and put *every* locale into it like this:

```javascript
import React from 'react';
import { Trans } from '@lingui/macro';

export default () => (
    <>
        <Trans>Not Found</Trans>
        <Trans>Resource could not be not found. Please check the URL and try again.</Trans>
        <Trans>Internal Server Error</Trans>
        <Trans>The server encountered an unexpected condition which prevented it from fulfilling the request.</Trans>
    </>
); 
```

After that you will be able to extract your locales using

`npm run extract`

To use your messages in the Marko templates, you will need to include the `site` library which will load the required message catalogs for you.

The `getSiteData: async (req, fastify, db, page)` method of the `site` library returns a siteData object which contains the `t` object. Read more on [how to use it in your templates](templates.md).

## Helper Scripts

Zoia has several helper scripts which can automate most of your internationalization tasks.

### Add a New Locale

To add a new locale, run 

`npm run add-locale-admin` (where *xx* is your locale)

`npm run add-locale-user` (where *xx* is your locale)

### Extract Messages

To extract all messages from every module, run

`npm run extract`

### Compile Messages

To make your messages available to the built modules, run:

`npm run compile`

(you will also need to rebuild Zoia to append your changes)

### Split Messages

To distribute a module, you will need to extract your messages from the shared messages catalog to the *locales* directory of your module. To do so, run:

`npm run split-locales`

### Combine Messages

If you wish to include a new module to your Zoia instance, you will need to merge the message catalog of a module into the shared messages catalog. To do so, run:

`npm run combine-messages`

You will also need to recompile the shared messages catalog using `npm run compile` and rebuild your Zoia instance to apply changes.